Add "Disagreeing Without Dividing" article (#99)
Zuehlke/software-engineering-corner: drafts/ disagreeing-without-dividing.md

---
title: Disagreeing Without Dividing
subtitle: Getting on the same side of the table
domain: software-engineering-corner.hashnode.dev

> tags: conflictresolution, engineering-leadership, team-culture, team-management, alignment, software-engineering

Reviewer: please make sure the tags are [supported by hashnode](https://github.com/Zuehlke/software-engineering-corner?tab=readme-ov-file#:~:text=Use%20tags%20which%20are%20listed%20here%20https://github.com/Hashnode/support/blob/main/misc/tags.json%20(use%20the%20slug)%20or%20ensure%20they%20exist%20via%20the%20Hashnode%20search%20(select%20%22tags%22).%20If%20you%20do%20it%20wrong%2C%20Hashnode%20may%20fail%20to%20import%20the%20article.)

Author: Thanks @tispBe 
As mentioned in the guidance, I checked every tag and found some usage via **Hashnode search**.
Please let me know if it's still problem. I can replace some tags from the json file.

> ...ensure they exist via the Hashnode search (select "tags"). If you do it wrong, Hashnode may fail to import the article.

Reviewer 2: If we've moved away from Hashnode, is this still a relevant comment?

publishAs: haym
saveAsDraft: true
hideFromHashnodeCommunity: false
---

In the world of software engineering, especially within a consultancy environment, disagreement in a project is inevitable. We often treat disagreement as a problem to be fixed, rather than a signal to _listen better_. But how we handle these disagreements and get on the same side of the table? 

## Why Do We Get Stuck?

Many of us, especially those with technical backgrounds, were trained to value correctness above all. From school tests to code reviews, we’re rewarded for being right, not for being curious.  
This mindset can carry into meetings where disagreement arises:

- _“Why don’t they get it?”_
- _“Am I not explaining clearly enough?”_
- _“They must be missing something.”_

In consultancy, where stakes are high and time is tight, this tension can escalate fast. Especially when client perspectives differ from ours.

Here's a quote I noted from a talk at a leadership meetup recently:

> You can’t change them. But you can change yourself. That starts by letting go of the need to be “right.” Instead, we can lead with **curiosity**.

> Ask:

Reviewer: Maybe paraphrase a bit more: 
```suggestion
So, aim to be curious instead of immediately disagreeing and ask:
```

- “What else do you see that I might be missing?”
- “Tell me more — what makes you say that?”

> These questions don’t just defuse tension. They open up space for mutual understanding, internally and with clients.

Reviewer: would remove the second part of the sentence. "internally" sounds a bit strange in the context of a public blog. 
```suggestion
These questions don’t just defuse tension. They open up space for mutual understanding.
```

## Why This Matters in a Consultancy Setting

> In our work at Zühlke, we act as innovation partners. That means navigating complexity across industries, stakeholders, and expectations. When we get stuck with a disagreement, from a team member or a client, our ability to **understand _why_** is often more valuable than our ability to explain _what_.

Reviewer 2: I'm confused by this paragraph. Could you make it a bit more explicit please?

Also, be careful with phrases like "get stuck" - they can be misinterpreted. As consultants, we aim never to be stuck!

Author: Thanks @immo-huneke-zuhlke 
Just wanted to be concise here to focus more on content. I've applied @tispBe's recommendations and it seems clearer.

> In our work at Zühlke, we act as innovation partners. That means navigating complexity across industries, stakeholders, and expectations. When we get stuck with a disagreement, from a team member or a client, our ability to **understand _why_** is often more valuable than our ability to explain _what_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our work at Zühlke, we act as innovation partners. That means navigating complexity across industries, stakeholders, and expectations. When we face disagreement from a team member or a client, our ability to **understand _why_** is often more valuable than the ability to explain our standpoint. 
```

> This approach helps us;

Reviewer 2: Suggest "This approach helps us to:"

> - Building trust.

Reviewer 2: Suggest:
- build trust
- make wiser decisions
- understand problems more fully
- create better collaboration

(it's active, and the list bullets replace periods at the end of each phrase)

- Making wiser decisions.
- Having better collaboration and understanding problems better.

## A Quote That Sums It Up

Chris Voss, in _Never Split the Difference_, writes:

> When individuals feel listened to, they tend to listen to themselves more carefully \[…\] and become less defensive and more open to others.

> This isn’t just negotiation advice. It’s a principle we can apply every day; in retrospectives, design reviews, or stakeholder calls. Disagreement is not failure. It’s a chance to practice better leadership, by shifting from “being right” to “being curious.”

Reviewer 2: Correct spelling: practise (verb, not noun - similar to license / licence)
